docs/example_run_output/tiling/README.md, before:

# `bean run` output files
These are the example output of [`bean run`](https://pinellolab.github.io/crispr-bean/run.html).
`bean run` produces [`bean_element_result.[model_type].csv`] as the main output and will produce log and per-guide information files, and intermediate `.pkl` file that saves ELBO loss for variational inference.

## `bean_element_result.[model_type].csv`
- Variant ID / grouping
  - `edit`: Variant ID.
  - `group`: The grouping of the coding variants, assigned as one of nonsense/missense/synonymous.
  - `int_pos`: The integer position of the noncoding variants.
  - `chrom`: The chromosome of the variant.
  - `pos`: The position of the variant. If coding variant, starts with `A` and the position specified 1-based amino acid position. If noncodig variant, numeric genomic position.
  - `ref`: The reference base/amino acid of the variant.
  - `alt`: The alternative base/amino acid of the variant.
  - `coding`: A flag indicating if the element is coding variant or not.

- Per-variant summary of variant-producing guides
  - `guide_target_group`: Aggregated `target_group` column in the input sgRNA_info.csv file. All unique values of the guides that produced (filtered) edited alleles that includes this variant is listed.
  - `effective_edit_rate`: The effective editing rate of the element. Calculated as `sum_over_guides(sum_over_alleles(per_guide_allele_editing_rate / # variants in the allele))`.
  - `editing_guides`: List of guides that edited the variant.
  - `per_guide_editing_rates`: The per-guide editing rates of the variant.
  - `n_guides`: The number of guides that edited the variant.
  - `n_coocc`: The number of unique co-occurring variants that appeared together in any alleles that contains the variant.
  
- Variant effect size: Use `mu_z_adj` whenever available, otherwise `mu_z_scaled`, otherwise `mu_z`.
  - `mu`: The mean value of the variant effect size.
  - `mu_sd`: The standard deviation of the mean value of the variant effect size.
  - `mu_z`: The z-score of the mean value of the variant effect size.
  - `sd`: The standard deviation of the phenotype induced by the variant.
  - `CI[0.025,0.975]`: The 95% credible interval of the mean value of the variant effect size. Corresponds to `mu_z_adj` when available, otherwise `mu_z_scaled`, otherwise `mu_z`. 
  - `[]_scaled`: Above values scaled by negative control variants.
  - `[]_adj`: Above values scaled by synonymous variants.
  
## `bean_sgRNA_result.[model_type].csv`
- `name`: sgRNA ID provided in the `name` column of the input.
- `edit_rate`: Effective editing rates
- `accessibility`: (Only if you have used `--scale-by-acc`) Accessibility signal that is used for scaling of the editing rate.
- `scaled_edit_rate`: (Only if you have used `--scale-by-acc`) Endogenous editing rate used for modeling, estimated by scaling reporter editing rate by accessibility signal
- `[cond1]_[cond2].median_lfc`: Raw LFC with pseudocount fed in with `--guide-lfc-pseudocount` argument (default 5).
- `variants`: Variants generated by this gRNA
- `variant_edit_rates`: Editing rate of this gRNA for each variant it creates.

Commit message:

adding per-replicate LFC and total editing rate

docs/example_run_output/tiling/README.md, after:

# `bean run` output files
These are the example output of [`bean run`](https://pinellolab.github.io/crispr-bean/run.html).
`bean run` produces [`bean_element_result.[model_type].csv`] as the main output and will produce log and per-guide information files, and intermediate `.pkl` file that saves ELBO loss for variational inference.

## `bean_element_result.[model_type].csv`
- Variant ID / grouping
  - `edit`: Variant ID.
  - `group`: The grouping of the coding variants, assigned as one of nonsense/missense/synonymous.
  - `int_pos`: The integer position of the noncoding variants.
  - `chrom`: The chromosome of the variant.
  - `pos`: The position of the variant. If coding variant, starts with `A` and the position specified 1-based amino acid position. If noncodig variant, numeric genomic position.
  - `ref`: The reference base/amino acid of the variant.
  - `alt`: The alternative base/amino acid of the variant.
  - `coding`: A flag indicating if the element is coding variant or not.

- Per-variant summary of variant-producing guides
  - `guide_target_group`: Aggregated `target_group` column in the input sgRNA_info.csv file. All unique values of the guides that produced (filtered) edited alleles that includes this variant is listed.
  - `effective_edit_rate`: The effective editing rate of the element. Calculated as `sum_over_guides(sum_over_alleles(per_guide_allele_editing_rate / # variants in the allele))`.
  - `editing_guides`: List of guides that edited the variant.
  - `per_guide_editing_rates`: The per-guide editing rates of the variant.
  - `n_guides`: The number of guides that edited the variant.
  - `n_coocc`: The number of unique co-occurring variants that appeared together in any alleles that contains the variant.
  
- Variant effect size: Use `mu_z_adj` whenever available, otherwise `mu_z_scaled`, otherwise `mu_z`.
  - `mu`: The mean value of the variant effect size.
  - `mu_sd`: The standard deviation of the mean value of the variant effect size.
  - `mu_z`: The z-score of the mean value of the variant effect size.
  - `sd`: The standard deviation of the phenotype induced by the variant.
  - `CI[0.025,0.975]`: The 95% credible interval of the mean value of the variant effect size. Corresponds to `mu_z_adj` when available, otherwise `mu_z_scaled`, otherwise `mu_z`. 
  - `[]_scaled`: Above values scaled by negative control variants.
  - `[]_adj`: Above values scaled by synonymous variants.
  
## `bean_sgRNA_result.[model_type].csv`
- `name`: sgRNA ID provided in the `name` column of the input.
- `edit_rate`: Total editing rate in the editing window. `NaN` if no editable target base exists within the window. 
- `edit_rate_norm`: Total editing rate divided by the number of editable base in the editing window. `NaN` if no editable target base exists within the window. 
- `accessibility`: (Only if you have used `--scale-by-acc`) Accessibility signal that is used for scaling of the editing rate.
- `scaled_edit_rate`: (Only if you have used `--scale-by-acc`) Endogenous editing rate used for modeling, estimated by scaling reporter editing rate by accessibility signal
- `[replicate].[cond1]_[cond2]`: Raw per-replicate LFC with pseudocount fed in with `--guide-lfc-pseudocount` argument (default 5).
- `variants`: Variants generated by this gRNA
- `variant_edit_rates`: Editing rate of this gRNA for each variant it creates.
